# Concepts

In this guide we describe STUNner's architecture and the most important components of an
operational STUNner installation.

## Architecture

A STUNner installation consists of two parts, a *control plane* and a *dataplane*. The control
plane consists of declarative policies specifying the way STUNner should let WebRTC media traffic
enter the Kubernetes cluster and reach the media servers, plus a gateway operator that renders the
high-level policies into an actual dataplane configuration. The dataplane in turn comprises one or
more `stunnerd` pods which deal with actual media packets. In particular, each `stunnerd` pod
exposes a regular STUN/TURN server for clients and forwards clients' packets to the media servers
based on the configuration generated by the gateway operator. Since the TURN service underlying
STUNner is agnostic to NATs, STUNner can ingest clients' media traffic into the private Kubernetes
pod network, addressing all NAT traversals (client-side and server-side) in a single go.

![STUNner architecture](/doc/stunner_arch_big.svg)

The unit of the STUNner configuration is a [designated Kubernetes
namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces) that holds
the control plane configuration and the dataplane pods. You can run multiple STUNner deployments
side-by-side by installing a separate control plane and dataplane into a each namespace (you must
still have only a single STUNner gateway operator though). Currently there is no way to share
configuration (e.g., UDPRoutes) between different namespaces.

### Control plane

The STUNner control plane consists of the following components:

* **Gateway hierarchy:** A Gateway hierarchy is a collection of [Kubernetes Custom
Resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources)
that together describe the way media traffic should enter the cluster, including public IP
addresses and ports clients can use to reach STUNner, TURN credentials, forwarding rules, etc. The
anchor of the Gateway hierarchy is the GatewayClass object, and the rest of the resources form a
complete hierarchy underneath it: the GatewayConfig describes general STUNner configuration,
Gateways define a public IP address, port and transport protocol for STUNner to open TURN servers,
and UDPRoutes point to the backend services client traffic should be forwarded to. See
[here](/doc/REFERENCE.md) for a full reference.

* **Gateway operator:** The main purpose of the gateway operator is to watch Gateway hierarchies
for change and, once a custom resource is added or modified by the user, render a new dataplane
running configuration. This configuration is then mapped into the filesystem of the `stunnerd` pods
running in the same namespace, so that each `stunnerd` instance will use the most recent
configuration. The implementation and documentation of the STUNner's gateway operator can be found
[here](https://github.com/l7mp/stunner-gateway-operator).

* **STUNner ConfigMap:** The STUNner ConfigMap contains the running dataplane configuration. Of
course, we could let the `stunnerd` pods themselves to watch the control plane for changes, but
this would run into scalability limitations for large deployments. Instead, in Kubernetes we
usually separate the control plane and the dataplane, which brings lots of cool
[benefits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software-defined_networking). The STUNner ConfigMap is
usually named as `stunnerd-config`, but you can override this from the GatewayConfig.

## Dataplane

The STUNner dataplane is comprised of a fleet of `stunnerd` pods. These pods actually implement the
TURN server, using the configuration available in the STUNner ConfigMap which is mapped into the
pods' filesystem dynamically. Then, `stunnerd` will watch for changes in the config file and, once
a change is detected, it [reconciles](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller)
the dataplane to match the new user policies.

The `stunnerd` daemon itself is essentially a simple TURN server on top of
[pion/turn](https://github.com/pion/turn) written in Go. The daemon will instantiate a separate
*listener* for each Gateway in the Gateway hierarchy to terminate clients' TURN sessions, a
*cluster* per each UDPRoute to forward packets to the backend services (e.g., to the media
servers), with some ancillary administrative and authentication mechanisms in place to check client
credentials before admitting traffic into the cluster, logging, etc.  There is a one-to-one mapping
between the control-plane Gateway resources and the `stunnerd` listeners, as well as between the
UDPRoute resources and `stunnerd`'s clusters. Whenever you modify a Gateway (UDPRoute), the gateway
operator renders a new dataplane configuration with the modified listener (cluster, respectively)
specs and the `stunnerd` pods immediately reconcile their internal state to the new configuration.
You are free to scale the dataplane to as many `stunnerd` pods as you like: Kubernetes will make
sure that new client connections are distributed evenly over the scaled-out STUNner dataplane.

Note that certain control-plane operations, and in particular the addition, removal or modification
of Gateway resources, induce a hard *TURN server restart* in `stunnerd`, which causes the
termination of all active connections. Until we fix the [pion/turn](https://github.com/pion/turn)
libraries underlying `stunnerd` to support the graceful addition and removal of listeners, it is
best to avoid live modification of the STUNner Gateway resources.

## Help

STUNner development is coordinated in Discord, feel free to [join](https://discord.gg/DyPgEsbwzc).

## License

Copyright 2021-2022 by its authors. Some rights reserved. See [AUTHORS](../AUTHORS).

MIT License - see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) for full text.

## Acknowledgments

Initial code adopted from [pion/stun](https://github.com/pion/stun) and
[pion/turn](https://github.com/pion/turn).
