# Authentication

STUNner uses the IETF STUN/TURN protocol suite to ingest media traffic into a Kubernetes cluster, which, [by design](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5766#section-17), provides comprehensive security. In particular, STUNner provides message integrity and, if configured with the TURN-TLS or TURN-DTLS listeners, confidentiality. To complete the CIA triad, this guide shows how to configure user authentication with STUNner.

## The long-term credential mechanism

STUNner relies on the STUN [long-term credential
mechanism](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8489.html#page-26) to provide user authentication.

The long-term credential mechanism assumes that, prior to the communication, STUNner and the WebRTC clients agree on a username and password to be used for authentication.  The credential is considered long-term since it is assumed to remain in effect until the user is no longer a subscriber of the system (STUNner's `static` authentication mode), or until the predefined lifetime of the credential expires (`ephemeral` authentication mode in STUNner).

STUNner secures the authentication process against replay attacks using a digest challenge.  In this mechanism, the server sends the user a realm (used to guide the user or agent in selection of a username and password) and a nonce.  The nonce provides replay protection.  The client also includes a message-integrity attribute in the authentication message, which provides an HMAC over the entire request, including the nonce.  The server validates the nonce and checks the message integrity.  If they match, the request is authenticated, otherwise the server rejects the request.

## Authentication workflow

The authentication workflow of STUNner is as follows.

1. *A username/password pair is generated.* This is outside the scope of STUNner; however, STUNner comes with a custom [authentication service](https://github.com/l7mp/stunner-auth-service) that can be queried for a valid ICE configuration to be used by clients to authenticate with STUNner.  The ICE configs returned by this service can be used by clients as the [option field in the `PeerConnection` call](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection/RTCPeerConnection#parameters), so that the resultant PeerConnections will be opened via STUNner as the TURN server.
   
   The ICE configs generated by the [STUNner authentication service](https://github.com/l7mp/stunner-auth-service) are always up to date with the most recent dataplane configuration. This makes sure that whenever you modify the STUNner Gateway API configuration (say, switch from `static` authentication to `ephemeral`), your clients will always receive an ICE config that reflects these changes (that is, the username/password pair will provide a time-windowed ephemeral credential).
   
   Below is a query to the STUnner auth service, by default available at the URL `http://stunner-auth.stunner-system:8088`, that returns a valid ICE config.

   ```console
   curl "http://stunner-auth.stunner-system:8088/ice?service=turn"
   {
     "iceServers": [
       {
         "username": "1681486023:"
         "credential": "v+MZOBeGWnk2690oJVL0qwF8YHQ=",
         "urls": [
           "turn:10.98.80.250:3478?transport=udp",
           "turn:10.105.169.152:3478?transport=tcp"
         ],
       }
     ],
     "iceTransportPolicy": "all"
   }
   ```

   Use the below query to generate a valid STUNner credential to access the Gateway called `my-gateway` deployed into the `my-namespace` namespace:

   ```console
   curl "http://stunner-auth.stunner-system:8088/ice?service=turn&ttl=3600&username=my-user&namespace=my-namespace&gateway=my-gateway"
   ```
   
2. The clients *receive the ICE configuration* (usually, from the application server) over a secure channel. This is outside the context of STUNner. Our advice is to return the ICE configuration during the session setup process, say, along with the initial configuration returned for clients before starting the call.

3. WebRTC clients are *configured with the ICE configuration*. The below snippet shows how to initialize a WebRTC [`PeerConnection`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection/RTCPeerConnection) to use the above ICE server configuration in order to use STUNner as the default TURN service.

   ```
   var iceConfig = <obtain ICE configuration sent by the application server>
   var pc = new RTCPeerConnection(iceConfig);
   ```

## Static authentication

In STUNner, `static` authentication is the simplest and least secure authentication mode, basically corresponding to a traditional "log-in" username and password pair given to users.

When STUNner is configured to use `static` authentication only a single username/password pair is used for *all* clients. This makes configuration easy; e.g., the ICE server configuration can be hardcoded into the static Javascript code served to clients. At the same time, `static` authentication is prone to leaking credentials: once an attacker learns a username/password pair they can use it without limits to reach STUNner (until the administrator rolls the credentials, see below).

The first step of configuring STUNner for the `static` authentication mode is to create a Kubernetes Secret to hold the username/password pair. The below will set the username to `my-user` and the password to `my-password`. If no `type` is set then STUNner defaults to `static` authentication.

```console
kubectl -n stunner create secret generic stunner-auth-secret --from-literal=type=static \
    --from-literal=username=my-user --from-literal=password=my-password
```

Then, we update the [GatewayConfig](GATEWAY.md) to refer STUNner to this Secret for setting authentication credentials.

```yaml
apiVersion: stunner.l7mp.io/v1
kind: GatewayConfig
metadata:
  name: stunner-gatewayconfig
  namespace: stunner
spec:
  realm: stunner.l7mp.io
  authRef:
    name: stunner-auth-secret
    namespace: stunner
```

It is a good security practice to reset the username/password pair every once in a while.  This can be done by simply updating the Secret that holds the credentials.

```yaml
kubectl -n stunner edit secret stunner-auth-secret
```

> [!WARNING]
>
> Modifying STUNner's credentials goes *without* restarting the TURN server but may affect existing sessions, in that active sessions will not be able to refresh their TURN allocation any more. This will result in the disconnection of clients using the old credentials.

## Ephemeral authentication

STUNner provides the `ephemeral` authentication mode for production use, which uses per-client time-limited STUN/TURN authentication credentials.  Ephemeral credentials are dynamically generated with a pre-configured lifetime and, once the lifetime expires, the credential cannot be used to authenticate (or refresh) with STUNner any more. This authentication mode is more secure since credentials are not shared between clients and come with a limited lifetime. Configuring `ephemeral` authentication may be more complex though, since credentials must be dynamically generated for each session and properly returned to clients.

STUNner adopts the [quasi-standard time-windowed TURN authentication credential format](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-uberti-behave-turn-rest-00) for ephemeral authentication. The TURN username consists of a colon-delimited combination of the expiration timestamp and the user-id parameter, where the user-id is some application-specific id that is opaque to STUNner and the timestamp specifies the date of expiry of the credential as a UNIX timestamp. The TURN password is computed from the a secret key shared with the TURN server and the returned username value, by performing `base64(HMAC-SHA1(secret key, username))`. STUNner extends this scheme somewhat for maximizing interoperability with WebRTC apps, in that it allows the user-id and the timestamp to appear in any order in the TURN username and it accepts usernames with a plain timestamp, without the colon and/or the user-id.

The advantage of this mechanism is that it is enough to know the shared secret for STUNner to be
able to check the validity of a credential. 

> [!WARNING]
> 
> The user-id is to ensure that the password generated per user-id is unique, but STUNner in no way checks whether it identifies a valid user-id in the system.

In order to switch from `static` mode to `ephemeral` authentication, it is enough to update the
Secret that holds the credentials. The below will set the shared secret `my-shared-secret` for the
ephemeral authentication mode.

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: stunner-auth-secret
  namespace: stunner
type: Opaque
stringData:
  type: ephemeral
  secret: my-shared-secret
EOF
```

Obtaining an ICE config from the STUNner authentication service will now return an ephemeral TURN
credential that is valid only for a single day. 

```console
curl "http://stunner-auth.stunner-system:8088/ice?service=turn&username=user-id"
{
  "iceServers": [
    {
      "username": "1681490135:user-id"
      "credential": "WSfJZ8QIi8ebu1uWhxlclvyjEPY=",
      "urls": [
        "turn:10.105.169.152:3478?transport=tcp",
        "turn:10.98.80.250:3478?transport=udp"
      ],
    }
  ],
  "iceTransportPolicy": "all"
}
```
